DID COVID-19 AFFECT CRUDE OIL PRICES?
YES, COVID-19 affected the crude oil prices and it has some serious effects in particular areas of the economy.
● One of those areas is the oil business. The COVID-19 outbreak is occurring at a time
when the oil market is already weak and prices are under pressure. Because of the disease’s potential for further business disruption, the oil industry is concerned. When itlooks at China and sees a lot less construction, less tourism, fewer people going out to
movies and restaurants, and so many factories shutting down, it sees trouble.
● For now, the oil industry will likely see additional downward pressure as news continues to come out, and more infections occur, but that would probably lead to production
cuts by OPEC and firming prices. 
● In the past, short-term crises were met with workaround solutions. The closing of the
Suez Canal in 1956, for example, didn’t have much of an impact on oil prices because
tanker traffic went around the Horn of Africa. Transit took longer, but the oil was delivered. In the case of this coronavirus, any problems in Wuhan, which is a transport hub
through which many goods pass, likely will trigger a similar temporary solution.
● Travel and tourism are likely to be the industries most affected by a longer outbreak.
For the oil business, that means a drop in jet fuel prices much greater than any decline
in the price of gasoline. China uses roughly a million barrels of jet fuel a day, accounting for about 12% of global jet fuel demand. Much of that fuel is used for international
travel, which has been affected already, but a lot is used for domestic flying, and it’s not
clear how much of that is shutting down.
 1. Effect of COVID-19 in Leading Oil Consuming Countries
Twenty two economies which consume 78 percent oil (fig.1) are under the ambit of COVID19. Even advanced economies like the United States, Germany, Spain, and Italy are yet to find
a way to overcome COVID-19 effect.
 Interpretation of table:
The United States of America-the largest economy in the world and the biggest consumer of oil finds
itself at the top of the table of most COVID-19 infected patients. China, the 2nd largest oil consumer
seems to be on the path of recovery, and India on the 3rd. Intense and rapid spread of COVID-19
forced leading European oil consumers to go into lockdown. It is observed that 84 percent of the
COVID infections and 94 percent of human casualties due COVID-19 happen to be in the top 22 oil
consuming nations. With combined GDP of $68 trillion these 22 countries contribute 79 percent of the
global GDP. This means that with restrictions on economic activities, consumption of oil will reduce in these countries and will certainly lead to economic slowdown followed by severe global
recession.
When Oil-Prices went Sub-zero : The COVID-19 Oil Crash2. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on prices for petroleum products
• In January 2020, after seeing a customary decline due to business shutdowns for the Chinese
New Year celebration, oil demand from China continued to fall because of economy-wide
pandemic-related closures. Demand for oil decreased by 3 million barrels per day, which
represents approximately 20 percent of the country’s overall oil consumption.
• In February, China’s Purchasing Managers’ Index fell nearly 49 percent. In January, BLS
producer and import oil price measures declined modestly, by 2.5 and 0.3 percent, respectively. Price declines continued, with producer prices for crude petroleum falling 14.3 percent and import prices declining 10.9 percent.
• A petroleum price war was triggered by a break-up of an alliance between Saudi Arabia -led 
OPEC and Russia over proposed oil production cuts in March 2020.
• By the beginning of April, OPEC had raised output by 1.7 million barrels per day, up to a 
level of 30.4 million barrels per day.The production boom for oil was down by almost 30 
million barrels per day because of the shutdowns in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 PPI for crude petroleum declined 34.0 percent in March and 48.8 percent in April. In all, the
PPI for crude petroleum fell 71.0 percent from January to April. The March and April decreases were the two largest monthly declines since the index was first published in July
1991. 
• The trend was similar for U.S. import prices. The Import Price Index for crude petroleum declined 34.1 percent in March and 36.6 percent in April. In all, prices for crude petroleum imports fell 62.8 percent from January to April.Interpretation
Figure 1 shows the producer and import price indexes
for crude petroleum from December 2019 to August
2020. Despite the partial recovery in crude petroleum
prices, both indexes remained below their January
2020 levels. The volatile movement in crude petroleum prices affected prices for items down the supply
chain.
3. The Impact of COVID-19 on Travel Behaviour
• Transportation is one of the major sectors, which has been severely affected by the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. From rickshaw pullers to airlines, all have been affected economically by the
pandemic. 
• India's overall energy demand fell by 11% in March 20201. Due to lockdown in many countries, the
demand for passenger transport has been adversely hit.
• Trade all across the globe is plunged as Covid-19 upends the global economy.
• Most of the public transport, rental services companies suspended their services during the 
lockdown tenure.Schools and Colleges have been closed due to Covid-19 pandemic.
• Indian Railways has suffered a loss of Rs 6,500 crore on revenue earned from ticket sales during 
the first two phases of lockdown itself.
Impact on Transport Sector in India:
a. Impact on Airline Sector
Domestic airlines reported a 33 % decline in the number of passengers flown in March 2020 by reporting a figure of 7.762 million, as compared to 11.6 million flown during the same period previously [Source: Directorate
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), GoI.
The table presents 
the comparison of 
number of domestic 
air passengers 
transported in 2019 
and 2020.Interpretation:
Based on the above data and analysis, it is interpreted that the international air passengers to India see a significant decline after March as the operations were suspended due to COVID-19, it is also evident that the number 
of domestic passengers carried in the first two quarters of 2020 i.e. till May reduced by almost half, dropping 
from 70.7 million in 2019 to 35.2 m in 2020.
b. Impact on Railway Sector
Indian Railways had cancelled all passenger train services since the start of the lockdown 1.0 to control the
spread of COVID-19 cases in the country. This implied that all the daily 13,500 passenger trains of Indian Railways as well as all forms of suburban trains and metro operations in metropolitan cities were halted since 25th
March, 2020.
The table presents the comparison of number of rail passengers and freight transported in 2019 and 2020.
Interpretation:
Based on the above data and analysis, it is evident that during April and May the no number of and 
passengers(millions) and overall transport of goods (freight) has also reduced tremendously.
